# Title

Build system

# Status

Accepted

# Context

We need a complete build system to **configure** and **compile** the project for the desired target.

For configuration, a tool such as **make menuconfig** perfectly matchs the needs and is widely used in longstanding projects such as the linux kernel. It generates a **.config** file which then feeds the build engine.

For building, **make** can be used such as in **linux**, **lk** or **Riot**. **Cmake** is another possibility seen in **zephyr**.

This system shall allow **modular** compilation.

# Decision

The **menuconfig** tool implementation is heavily inspired by the [zephyr](https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/tree/main/scripts/kconfig) one. The python library [kconfiglib](https://github.com/ulfalizer/Kconfiglib) is used which is fully compliant to the [Kconfig](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/next/kbuild/kconfig-language.html) specification.

The **build** system is implemented through four makefiles: **build.mk**, **collect.mk**, **compile.mk** and **macros.mk**. It's inspired from [lk](https://github.com/littlekernel/lk/tree/master/make) and works as presented here after:

```C
     build.mk

        │  includes generated/config.mk
        │
        │  which defines CONFIG flags
        │
        │  and GLOBAL_MODULE_LIST variable
        ▼

    collect.mk ◄───┐  iterate over GLOBAL_MODULE_LIST
                   │
        │          │
        ▼          │
                   │
    compile.mk     │  creates targets for each MODULE in the list
        │          │
        └──────────┘
```

The top **build.mk** file includes **config.mk** containing a list of all modules to compile (**config.mk** is generated from the **.config**). It then calls **collect.mk** which iterates through the list to create all needed targets.

In **compile.mk**, targets for each module are defined. **Target specific variables** are used to compile each module with its own **include files list** and **compiler flags**:

```Makefile
$(MODULE_ID): MODULE_CINCS := $(MODULE_CINCS)
$(MODULE_ID): MODULE_ASMINCS := $(MODULE_ASMINCS)
$(MODULE_ID): MODULE_CFLAGS := $(MODULE_CFLAGS)
```

A custom **meta-tool** named **anckor** has been designed to manage configuration, build and run steps. This tool is in charge of the translation from the **.config** file to the **config.mk** one.

# Consequences

The build system is straightforward and as simple as possible. It's **modular** by design as it only compiles modules defined through the configuration stage.

It also uses the widespread tool **Kconfig** which is convenient to manage complex configurations et their dependencies.

Compilation of a new module is trivial as it only needs a **module.mk** file at the module directory root which defines **two variables**.