# Title

Continous integration workflow

# Status

Accepted

# Context

Thanks to [adr-005](../arch/adr-005.md), a test engine can run all kernel tests and display the final result through the serial link. This engine has to be automated in a continous integration workflow which can be run at each pull request.

# Decision

As the project is hosted on github, the CI tool of the platform which is called **github workflow** will be used. 

First a dedicated script has been developed to automate the test process of the kernel. This scripts works as follows:
1. it runs the qemu guest in an isolated process and run the tests
2. it handles test results through the serial link
3. it exits with an error return code if one test failed.

This [ci](../../tools/ci/ci.py) script can now be runned through the github workflow: 

```yaml
name: build-and-test

      ...

      - name: test code
        run: python tools/ci/ci.py

      ...
```

As it can be seen, the CI process is at least dependant to the github tooling as possible: it just runs the script. If the script returns an error code through the **sys.exit()** process then the workflow fill automatically fail.

Others steps in the workflow are used to install **qemu**, the **cross-toolchain** and the **anckor tool**.

```yaml
    - name: install code
      uses: actions/checkout@v4

    - name: install qemu
      run: |
        sudo apt install qemu-system-riscv64
        qemu-system-riscv64 --version

    - name: install riscv cross-toolchain
      run: |
        sudo apt install gcc-riscv64-unknown-elf
        riscv64-unknown-elf-gcc --version

    - name: install anckor tool
      run: |
        source ./setenv.sh
        anckor --version
```

# Consequences

The whole process is functionnal but the communication between the [CI](../../tools/ci/ci.py) script and the [anckor test engine](../arch/adr-005.md) is not weel-defined. A standard format such as **json** would be prefer to extend the use of the **ATE**. We could also consider to communicate with real boards with the CI script, not only a qemu guest.