# Title

Init task

# Status

Accepted

# Context

We need a way to load user applications from the kernel.

A first solution can be seen in [Riot](https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/blob/master/tests/minimal/main.c#L21): a unique **main** procedure is declared and is statically compiled with the kernel. This procedure is the unique entry point for the user application. Its main advantage is to allow the user to write applucation code without thinking about calling a specific routine to start the kernel (which is the way [freertos](https://github.com/FreeRTOS/FreeRTOS/blob/main/FreeRTOS-Plus/Demo/FreeRTOS_Plus_Reliance_Edge_and_CLI_Windows_Simulator/main.c#L76) starts an app, **vTaskStartScheduler** has to be called from the main routine). The drawback is that a user has to write its application as a **monolitic** program starting from only one entry point: the main function. 

This forbids designing, developping and testing the software in a more modular way but many small, embedded kernels choose this solution as it's very simple and straighforward. It also boots the system quickly.

[linux](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/latest/source/init/main.c#L1518) in contrast enables a modular design pattern by starting all user applications with a dedicated tool knowned as **init**. This little program looks for **etc/inittab** configuration file which holds all information to launch user programs. Advantages are modularity as the configuration is read at runtime, this enables to change the start configuration without recompiling the kernel. The main drawback is the necessity to use a file system to store and read configuration data.

An other way is showed by [lk](https://github.com/littlekernel/lk/blob/master/app/inetsrv/inetsrv.c#L211): application code is saved in a dedicated section with the [APP_START](https://github.com/littlekernel/lk/blob/master/app/include/app.h#L43) macro. Then [apps_init](https://github.com/littlekernel/lk/blob/master/app/app.c#L22) looks for all **app_descriptor** structures stored in the section (declared in the linker script) and starts corresponding programs. This enables great **modularity** without too much complexity.

# Decision

A similar solution such as the one seen in **lk** is implemented: all application entry points are **statically** defined with the **REGISTER_APP** macro.

```C
void main_thread(void) {
  ...
}

REGISTER_APP(test_thread, 3, main_thread)
```

This macro fills a structure **app_info_t** with the application name, priority and entry point. 

```C
#define REGISTER_APP(_name, _prio, _entry) \
  stack_t    stack_##_name;                \
  app_info_t app_##_name = {               \
      .name  = #_name,                     \
      .stack = &stack_##_name,             \
      .prio  = _prio,                      \
      .entry = _entry,                     \
  };                                       \
  _app_section app_info_t *app_##_name##_pt = &app_##_name;
```

A pointer to these data is stored in the **".data.apps"** declared in the linker script:

```C
/* 
Apps section
*/
PROVIDE(_apps_start = .);
KEEP(*(.data.apps));
PROVIDE(_apps_end = .);
```

The **init_task** enventually looks for all data stored in this section and creates a task for each application descriptor it finds.

```C
void init_run(void) {
  // iterate over all app descriptors saved in the section(.data.apps)
  for (uint64_t *app_pt = &_apps_start; app_pt < &_apps_end; app_pt += 1) {
    // get the app descriptor from the current pointer
    app_info_t *app = (app_info_t *)*app_pt;
    // create a task for the app
    task_create(app->name, app->entry, app->stack, app->prio);
  }
}
```

Once all tasks are registered in the kernel, the init task reaches the **task_exit** routine. The memory is fully cleaned up and the **init_task** is removed from the **runqueue**. The kernel now only runs the **idle_task** and **any registered task**.

# Consequences

The system enables the user to design and launch application code in a modular way. The solution is lightweight and easy to implement.

The main drawback is that applications are registered **statically** with a macro. An improvement could be to read some sort of configuration file similar to **inittab** and follow its instructions to start applications.